Adding GEP-1748: Gateway API Interaction with Multi-Cluster Services (#1843)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-1748.md

# GEP-1748: Gateway API Interaction with Multi-Cluster Services

* Issue: [#1748](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/1748)

> * Status: Experimental

Reviewer: In just a general way I'm uncomfortable with things that would not _start_ in `Provisional` and spend some time there. Given how we use `Experimental` today, this would seem to indicate that most or all of the current questions and concerns about this initiative are more or less sorted out and we're ready to implement and try it. My suggestion would be:

```suggestion
* Status: Provisional
```

And then maybe to "experiment" (as distinct from what we call the "experimental" today) we could put it through the `Prototyping` status where we starting demoing an implementation? As far as I can see, this change in approach would result in a very similar trajectory, but with a more clear message that implementations should not necessarily start implementing this right away? I'm open to suggestion I just need some help to better understand the motivation.

Author: I think this is different than other GEPs in that we're not actually adding any APIs here or making any changes to existing APIs, we're just defining how APIs should interact. In that sense, I'd consider it similar to how Policy Attachment is also in an experimental state. 

> we could put it through the Prototyping status where we starting demoing an implementation?

There are already 2 implementations that support Gateway API and MCS API (GKE and AWS Lattice) with at least one more on the way soon. @liwenwu-amazon and I will be [speaking about our implementations at KubeCon](https://sched.co/1HyZO) in a couple weeks and I believe both of our implementations meet the guidelines described here. 

I can't really think of any other possible interpretation of how these APIs could interact with each other. In my opinion this is really just formalizing something that is already being done in practice.

Reviewer: > In that sense, I'd consider it similar to how Policy Attachment is also in an experimental state.

Policy attachment has been a communicated concept for some time and something that's more of a suggestion in practice, so it seems a bit different from this which was only colloquially understood by some implementations implementing it independently, and is also somewhat niche.

> I can't really think of any other possible interpretation of how these APIs could interact with each other. In my opinion this is really just formalizing something that is already being done in practice.

I get this, and I personally agree with it which is why I said in my above review that I'm for the content overall. My main concern is that this comes in fast, we all think it's good, and then someone comes along later and actually does have some different interpretation but we're like "sorry we're in production with this already". We wouldn't want that scenario for anything, of course, I suppose the flip side is that we _always_ have the potential of running into this kind of problem even if things take a different path, if someone interested simply takes to long to show up :shrug: 

I'm getting the point that we're basically already in a scenario where "it's already a thing" as we're just formalizing something that people are already doing, so I perhaps the best thing for us to do is just make sure we get an approval from the 3 implementers we have so far and make sure we haven't missed anything. I'll consider this comment resolved thanks for the discussion.

“/east” to the store-east ServiceImport. Requests that don’t match either of
these paths will be routed to the “store” ServiceImport which represents a
superset of the “store-west” and “store-east” ServiceImports.

```yaml
{% include 'standard/multicluster/httproute-location.yaml' %}
```

#### Advanced Routing With ServiceImports

All Routing capabilities in Gateway API should apply equally whether the backend
is a Service or ServiceImport. For example, when routing to a system with
multiple read replicas, it could be beneficial to route requests based on HTTP
Method. In the following example, requests with POST, PUT, and DELETE methods
are routed to `api-primary` while the rest are routed to `api-replicas`:

```yaml
{% include 'standard/multicluster/httproute-method.yaml' %}
```

#### Routing to Both Services and ServiceImports

There are some situations where it will be useful to split traffic between a
Service and ServiceImport. In the following example, 90% of traffic would go to
endpoints attached to the cluster-local "store" Service, and the remaining 10%
would go to endpoints attached to the Multi-Cluster "store-global" Service:

```yaml

> {% include 'standard/multicluster/httproute-hybrid.yaml' %}

Reviewer 2: nit: The sample has the names backwards

Author: Woops, thanks!

```

#### Cross-Namespace References with ReferenceGrant

It is possible to use ReferenceGrant to enable cross-namespace references to
ServiceImports. For example, the following HTTPRoute would forward traffic to

> endpoints attached to the “bar” Service in the “bar” namespace:

Author: Updated, thanks!

```yaml
{% include 'standard/multicluster/httproute-referencegrant.yaml' %}
```

### Mesh: ServiceImport as Parent

In some cases, you may want to override traffic destined for a Multi-Cluster

> Service with a mesh. As part of the broader GAMMA initiative, ServiceImport can

Reviewer 3: do we have any doc to describe how mesh integrates with gateway api?

be used in the same way that Service is used as a ParentRef. When a Service is
specified as a parent, meshes will intercept traffic destined for the ClusterIP
of the Service and apply any policies or routing decisions defined by the Route.
Similarly, when a ServiceImport is specified as a parent, meshes will intercept
traffic destined for the ClusterSetIP and apply any policies or routing
decisions defined by the Route. In the following example, the mesh would

> intercept traffic destined for the store ClusterSetIP and redirect it to
> endpoints for the local Service within the same cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
intercept traffic destined for the store ClusterSetIP matching the `/cart` path
and redirect it to the `cart` Multi-Cluster Service.
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

```yaml

> {% include 'standard/multicluster/httproute-gamma.yaml' %}

Reviewer 4: Service as a parentRef for TCPRoute is a viable use case, and is included in [GEP-1426](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-1426/). HTTPRoute is important for some more advanced configuration, such as redirecting only a specific path (like `/admin`) to a different Service backendRef when doing something like splitting up a monolith application.

```

### Services vs ServiceImports

It is important that all implementations provide a consistent experience. That

> means that references to Services MUST always be interpreted as references to

Reviewer 5: I share John's concerns above; I'd be much more comfortable with the MUST being lessened to a SHOULD at least until MCS API is beta.

Author: Yeah I think that's a fair point. Hopefully MCS API is going to make it to beta sometime soon, but agree that we should not overly restrict Services until that point. Updated to "SHOULD".

> endpoints within the same cluster for that Service. References to ServiceImports

Author: >I wanted to flag that this seems to prohibit "transparent-proxy" mesh functionality that could automatically route traffic to a Service to viable multicluster endpoints unless explicitly encoded in Route configuration.

Yeah, that's the intent here. The idea would be that users should explicitly be able to request multicluster endpoints/routing, but never have that happen automatically. 

>For GAMMA configuration, this could be enabled per Service by writing a Route to direct all traffic intended for a Service to a corresponding ServiceImport backend to spread load across multicluster endpoints (as an alternative to explicitly updating application upstreams from *.cluster.local to *.clusterset.local), which seems reasonable enough, but does have some configuration overhead for enabling clusterset-wide routing for all multicluster services.

Agree that that's a potential workaround. I have updated this to a `SHOULD` for now based on @keithmattix's comment above, but would like to see Gateway API/GAMMA usage adopt the Kubernetes pattern that multicluster routing is something you opt in to. Maybe the more important concept would be that exporting a Service in one cluster is required for it to be accessible in other clusters. Open to input here, but if that's a workable solution, it would definitely be more consistent with the rest of Kubernetes.

I am interested in finding ways to lower the implementation overhead for MCS today, such as the current proposal that would remove the requirement to propagate EndpointSlices to each cluster. I'm hoping this can become just a configuration thing where users simply have to opt-in to exporting a Service and the rest is lightweight and automatic.

> endpoints within the same cluster for that Service. References to ServiceImports

Author: Resolving this for now, let me know if I missed anything @mikemorris

> endpoints within the same cluster for that Service. References to ServiceImports

Reviewer 4: > The idea would be that users should explicitly be able to request multicluster endpoints/routing, but never have that happen automatically.

Was talking with @howardjohn a bit about this yesterday, and the concern is that this approach can force multicluster load balancing or failover to be a concern of the service _consumer_ rather than the _producer_ who may best understand how to shape incoming traffic to a service under their management to ensure reliability and high availability.

Consumer opt-in can make sense for service discovery use cases when DNS is the primary interface to return workload addresses to dial directly (Consul's service discovery uses [prepared queries](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/services/discovery/dns-dynamic-lookups) for similar client-defined routing behavior), but allowing producer-defined routing rules to direct `.cluster.local` requests to off-cluster endpoints is an important mesh capability.

I think we have enough wiggle room with the change to `SHOULD`, but definitely want to get this explored in more depth as a GAMMA+MCS user stories.

> would like to see Gateway API/GAMMA usage adopt the Kubernetes pattern that multicluster routing is something you opt in to

For me the key is which persona is opting in to this functionality. Agreed it would be dangerous for a cluster/mesh administrator to enable global multi-cluster routing (it's nice for demos though 😉), but we shouldn't have to rely on all downstream consumers of a service understanding when and how to configure multi-cluster routing for each upstream service they depend on.

> Maybe the more important concept would be that exporting a Service in one cluster is required for it to be accessible in other clusters.

Is this not already an assumption/requirement? **Definitely agreed** with this - meshes _may_ offer a higher-level API to do something like automatically create ServiceExports for every service in a given namespace, but having services explicitly exported in order for an MCS implementation to create corresponding ServiceImports on other clusters in the group/clusterset is definitely essential - some services should likely always stay cluster-local.

> I am interested in finding ways to lower the implementation overhead for MCS today

Same! I'm excited to see progress on conformance tests, and getting more clarity around some of these behaviors or edge cases is going to be important for MCS to be a useful building block for multi-cluster service mesh deployments.

MUST be interpreted as references to the full set of endpoints attached to that

> ServiceImport. In practice, that means that users should use “Service” when they

Reviewer 4: This is the biggest ⚠️ for me, and is a bit tricky at multiple levels:
- Reading this the first time, I had assumed `"full set of endpoints"` was intending to strictly define _the set of endpoints expected to be attached to a ServiceImport_ rather than just how they should be consumed, which would have been a significant expectation above the guidance in [KEP-1645](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-multicluster/1645-multi-cluster-services-api#importing-services):
  > The `EndpointSlices` imported for a service are not guaranteed to exactly match the originally exported `EndpointSlices`, but each slice is guaranteed to map only to a single source cluster.

  I've heard guidance elsewhere that the _endpoints attached to a ServiceImport_ should be "representative" of the available multicluster endpoints (citation needed cc @JeremyOT) rather than necessarily the full set, which is important for allowing a ServiceImport to:
  - _directly_ expose only a subset of pod endpoints from other clusters, particularly in clustersets with a very large number of endpoints for a ServiceExport
  - _indirectly_ expose imported services through a transit gateway of some sort (rather than allowing direct pod <> pod connections across clusters), which may otherwise necessitate a permissive networking environment with egress and ingress allowed across a wide range of IPs and/or the assumption of a "flat" non-overlapping networking shared by all clusters (IIRC "reachability" of imported services is an assumption/requirement of MCS, but the exact mechanics of how to implement that are intentionally not proscribed)
- The phrase `"references to ... endpoints"` seems like it _might_ be understood as implying "direct" pod addressing, which could preclude using gateways between clusters as described above. Cloud provider MCS implementations do commonly enable this through VPCs, but some Gateway API implementations may want to reference off-cluster or multi-network services without relying on this substrate.
  - If this were clarified to more explicitly describe the contents of the EndpointSlices associated with a ServiceImport (whatever those may point to) this might be flexible enough.

There's some additional complexity around how cross-cluster "direct endpoint" routing might work for GAMMA, but I think that scope could be deferred if we can affirm that ServiceImport "indirect" routing through gateways in other clusters is a permissible implementation.

Author: Good catch, thanks @mikemorris! I think you're right that the MCS Spec just requires a representative set, not the full set. I also agree that it allows for gateways between clusters or other intermediate steps. I've tried to reword this section to avoid requiring either direct pod addressing or routing to the full set of endpoints from each cluster. Not sure I've got it quite right yet, so let me know if you can think of a better way to state this requirement.

Author: Resolving this for now, let me know if I missed anything @mikemorris
